0. there is no holy grail of the good life
1. consider exchanging money for saving time and living without hassle
1. you are already dead, the time you have now is a gift
2. forget about the perfect set-up; self-correct whatever goes wrong
3. flexibility fatigues the mind, make pledges and stick to them
4. radically accept your deficiencies
4. write in your "black box" (flight recorder) what things went wrong so you don't repeat the same mistake
5. technology often carries counterproductivity aspects with it
5. if technology genuinely doesn't contribute something, leave it alone
6. focus on the potential downside and how to avoid it
6. be consistently not stupid, instead of trying to be very intelligent
7. your success is based on genes and external factors you have no control over
7. be humble, pride is pointless
8. introspection is unreliable and won't lead to the good life
8. don't trust your emotions
9. authenticity leaves you vulnerable
10. when asked a favor, think about it for five seconds
11. compare two things as wholes to avoid falling in the focusing illusion
12. spend money on experiences instead of physical objects
13. once basic needs are met, money brings little additional satisfaction
13. save up a year's worth of salary, live modestly
14. develop a single or a few outstanding skills and know your limits
15. the more peaceful the life, the more productive. keep honing your skills
16. your focus should be on the work, not the result, the success
16. build on the skills you actually have
17. liberate yourself from what others think of you
18. you can change your personality, even if a little. consider who you admire
18. you cannot change other people, so avoid those you don't get along with
19. goals work and are important, but leave them vague and achievable
20. our memories are error-prone; we remember the peak and end of an event
21. our brains cope with past, present, and future; value them equally
21. make long-term plans but enjoy the present
21. our remembering self will die, so stop worrying about creating memories
22. the brain compresses information as compact, consistent, causal stories
22. excuses are brake pads that stop our learning from our mistakes
23. contemplating about death is unproductive
24. self-pity is a vicious circle that solves nothing and makes you feel worse
24. complaining is also a waste of time
25. strike a balance between meaningfulness and enjoyment
26. commit to a limited amount of beliefs you will defend vigorously
27. make it clear on the outside what you believe in, or you'll become a puppet
28. define what things you would not sell for money
29. anxiety leads to stress and stress shortens our lifespans
29. deal only with things you can influence or affect
29. write about your worries
29. take out insurance
29. find focused, fulfilling work
30. if a topic is too complex, it's better to not have an opinion on it
31. Fortuna is the personification of Fate who turns the wheel of fortune
31. choose how you react to the ups and downs of life
31. material goods and people are fleeting
31. Christianity befogged the European mind, delegating responsibility for one's own life to a fiction (God)
32. envy is an animal instinct, and the most toxic of all emotions
32. resist the urge to compare yourself to others. avoid school reunions
32. deliberately identify the person you envy's worst aspects and imagine them struggling
33. wisdom is prevention--avoidance of problems above ability to solve them
33. imagine as many possibilities and outcomes of things that could go wrong
34. contribute money to relief organizations, time is better spent working with what you're good at
34. you are not responsible for the ills of the world
35. focus, time and money are our most important resources
35. focus cannot be divided
35. happiness is determined by how you allocate your attention
36. read twice and pay attention. a good book should leave an impression
37. spot an ideology as something that explains everything and is irrefutable
37. ask yourself what facts would lead you to give up your worldview
37. understand that you don't understand the world
38. due to habituation, gratitude tends to lose its positive effect
38. mental subtraction is imagining and feeling how life would be without good things you are accustomed to
39. act instead of just mulling things over
40. imagining yourself in others' shoes is not enough, you must physically do the things they do or be in their place
41. history works like traffic, not cars. events would have happened without the "great men" apparently behind them
42. don't put people on pedestals, especially yourself
42. don't believe in your own self-importance
43. the world is fundamentally amoral
44. a cargo cultist imitates form but without substance; stay away from them
45. the global economy is specialized; generalists are no longer useful
46. find a field of activity not beset by arms races
47. make friends with outsiders and weirdos, but keep one foot in the establishment
48. resist accepting a candidate too soon. Statistically, rejectin the first 37% is optimal
48. take as many samples as you can while you're young
49. breathing, eating and drinking are the only things you have to have
49. goals are desires, such as wanting children
49. we cannot expect others to conform to our expectations any more than the weather
49. separate necessities, desires and expectations
49. rate your expectations of dates, projects, parties, books, etc. from 1 to 10 and purposely lower it 2 points
50. 90 percent of everything is crap
50. if you're not sure whether something is bullshit, it's bullshit
51. the ego is more an antagonist than friend
51. self-importance requires energy; you have to keep track whether others like you or not
52. definitions of success are products of their time
52. inner success is achieved by focusing exclusively on things we have control over
52. be serene, imperturbable, tranquil
52. success is about attitude, not winning titles or earning material goods
52. seeking external success indirectly creates inner success; why not take the direct route?
