Copied from Google Docs "The art of the good life, Rolf Dobelli"

1. Mental Accounting
How to turn a loss into a win

Set aside a fixed amount of money for good causes, or necessary expenses. Deduct fines and extra expenses from overpriced items (such as from convenience stores) from this total. Do not get upset over small charges or waiting in line. The added stress is not worth it.

2. The Fine Art of Correction
Why we overestimate set-up

A typical airplane flight has to self-correct its path countless times. Hoping that "the ideal training" and "perfect planning" will run smoothly is unrealistic.

3. The Pledge
Inflexibility as a stratagem

A pledge is a promise that cannot be broken, or "absolute commitment." Flexibility is a trap that saps your willpower.

4. Black Box Thinking
Reality doesn't care about your feelings; or, why every false step improves your life

You have to accept reality at all times, especially when you don't like what you see (Radical acceptance of defeats, deficiencies, flops).

A "black box" is writing down what's going on through your mind whenever you make a big decision--assumptions, trains of thought, conclusions. If something went wrong, analyze precisely what happened.

5. Counterproductivity
Why Timesavers are often Timewasters

Counterproductivity is apparent only at a second glance. Technology like PowerPoint led to its development of special effects, requiring countless hours of pointless additions to presentations. 

In the case of cars, consider how many hours are wasted in traffic, and hours of work needed to pay for it.

6. The Negative Art of the Good Life
Do nothing wrong and the right thing will happen

Concentrate on the downside: you can't say what a good life is, but can say what a good life isn't (alcoholism, drug addiction, chronic stress, a job you despise). 
By systematically eliminating the downside you'll have a real chance of achieving a good life. Think about what not to do. Steer clear of stupidity and trends instead of striving for ultimate bliss.

7. The Ovarian Lottery
Why you didn't earn your successes

The result of where you are is largely due to factors out of your control. Stay humble, and willingly donate to those born in a less favorable environment.

8. The Introspection Illusion
Take feelings seriously--Just not your own

You won't find the good life through introspection. You're better at reading the feelings of others, so ask a friend to analyze you. Imagine you are an open market, and emotions are birds that fly past or stop by.

9. The Authenticity Trap
Why you need a Secretary of State

Don't buy into the authenticity hype. We don't really understand ourselves. By being too open you will look ridiculous. You need a psychological barrier. Adopt a "second self" that others will see. Keep private matters for your diary.

10. The Five-Second No
Small Favors, Big Pitfalls

Although the tit-for-tat strategy works for negotiations with people you're not related to, following it requires you to say "Yes" at first, which you may regret. If you're asked a favor, think about it for five seconds. 

11. The Focusing Illusion
Why you wouldn't be happier in the Caribbean

The focusing illusion is that "nothing in life is as important as you think it is while you are thinking about it." The more narrow the focus, the greater its apparent influence. Try comparing things from a distance or as a whole. 

12. The Things You Buy Leave No Trace
Why you should buy less and experience more

A nice car makes you happy when you think about it but not so much when you're driving it. Enjoyment of experiences are not diminished by the focusing illusion

13. Fuck-You Money
Saving up freedom

Diminishing marginal utility shows how each additional unit of a good is worth less than the last. Easterlin showed that material progress was not reflected in increased life satisfaction. Fuck-you money are savings that would allow you to quit your job without ending in dire financial straits. One year's salary, say. It is freedom and allows you to see and think objectively.

Don't think too much about money. It won't multiply more quickly the more often you think about it. 

Don't compare yourself with the wealthy. Live modestly.

14. The Circle of Competence
Why it's important to know your limits

Knowing the boundaries of the skills you have mastered is vital. With a sharply delineated boundary, you won't have to think about whether to accept or refuse a task. Never step outside your circle of competence. 

To develop the circle of competence, you need time and obsession. 

The opposite of obsession is interest, not aversion. (I'm not really that interested).

What matters is that you're far above average in at least one area. A single outstanding skill trumps a thousand mediocre ones.

15. The Secret of Persistence
Why bores are more successful than adventurers

Our brains love short-term, spasmodic developments. As a result, we systematically overemphasize doing above not-doing, and action above waiting. The secret of persistence is in exponential growth. 

Many people are convinced that for a life to be good, it must be one long highlight reel of adventures, travels, and relocations. I believe the opposite is the case. Less busywork, more endurance. 

16. The Tyranny of a Calling
Do what you can, not what you wish you could

"Finding your calling" is a relic of Christianity (finding God). The concept of a calling is one of the greatest illusions of our age. The danger is in taking yourself and your work too seriously. Your focus should be on the activity, the work, the input--not the success, the result, the output.

Selection bias is a related pitfall. You only hear about the successful examples of people with a calling. You don't see the infinitely larger pool of failures. 

Build on the skills you actually have. 

17. The Prison of a Good Reputation
How to shift from external to internal validation

One of most vital ideas to leading a good life is to know the difference between an inner scorecard and an outer scorecard. Which matters more to you? How you evaluate yourself, or how the outside world evaluates you?

Liberate yourself from the Stone Age thinking that your reputation matters so much. Spare yourself the emotional roller coaster. Concentrating on reputation distorts our perception of what makes us truly happy. It stresses you out.

Accomplish something. Do something you feel good about.

18. The "End of History" Illusion
You can change yourself, but not other people

You can exercise some influence over changes in your personality. Not much, but the most efficient way to steer your development is to use your idols.

Avoid situations in which you have to change other people, such as when hiring people. Do not employ anybody whose character you have to change. "Hire for attitude, train for skill."

19. The Smaller Meaning of Life
Which goals you can achieve, and which you can't

"Who are you?" cannot be answered easily. Answering the "larger meaning of life" is also pointless. 

Having "smaller", personal goals is crucial. "Let all your efforts be directed to something, let it keep that end in mind". Life goals are massively important. 

It's not money that makes you happy or unhappy, it's whether or not you realize your ambitions.

You need to make sure your goals are realistic. Leave your goals deliberately a little vague.

20. Your Two Selves
Why your life isn't a photo album

The experiencing self and remembering self rarely agree on whether you are happy or not. The peak-end rule states that we remember most clearly the peak of an episode (moment of greatest intensity) and the end.

The cognitive bias that a holiday that lasted a week or three feels the same is called duration neglect. The remembering self is remarkably error-prone. We tend to prize brief, intense pleasures too highly (such as bungee jumping).

What's more important to you? A fulfilled moment-to-moment life or a full photo album?

21. The Memory Bank
Experience trumps memory

How much would you pay for an experience if you weren't able to remember if afterward?

The memory bank phenomenon is that experiences only count if you remember them. 

Be consciously aware of good moments in the present, instead of scrabbling for memories. We overvalue memory and undervalue the experienced moment.

Mindfulness is often confused with "not thinking about the future," a gross mistake. "Live each day as if it were your last" is an idiotic piece of advice that will send you into hospital, prison, or grave.

Make long-term plans then focus on the now.

22. Life Stories are Lies
Why we go through the world with a false self-image

The brain stores processed data, not raw data: Compact, Consistent, and Causal stories. 

We change more rapidly than we think. Chance plays a far greater role and can upend any plans. Our fabricated life story makes it difficult to judge individual facts plainly. We see ourselves as better than we really are. 

Part of the good life is to see yourself as realistically as possible--contradictions, shortcomings, and dark sides.


23. The "Good Death" Fallacy
Why your final moments shouldn't worry you

Contemplating your hour of death is unproductive. You will remember a film that's exciting throughout but ends unsatisfactorily as a bad film (similarly for parties, concerts, books, lectures, homes, and relationships). 

Age and death are the price we pay for a good life, like a hefty bill after a meal. Don't pay for a fast-food burger, take a six-course dinner in a Michelin-starred restaurant.

24. The Spiral of Self-Pity
Why it makes no sense to wallow in the past

Self-pity is one of the most useless responses to life's trials. It will suck you deeper down the longer you're bobbing around in it.

Victimization is unproductive and toxic. Accept the wrongs of the past and try to either manage or endure the hardships of the present. 

Blaming other people, especially your parents, has an expiry date. Even awful childhood events are minimally correlated with success or satisfaction in adult life.

"Whenever you think that some situation or some person is ruining your life, it is actually you who are ruining your life." Don't feel like a victim.

25. Hedonism and Eudemonia
How meaning can compensate for enjoyment--and the other way around

What activities contribute to a good life? The "enjoyable" (eating chocolate) or "meaningful" (raising children) ones? 

Hedonists believe that a good life consisted of consuming the maximum possible number of immediate pleasures. Most other philosophers thought that instant gratification was base, decadent, and animalistic. They strove for "higher pleasures" (eudemonia). Some thought these meant virtues like temperance, courage, justice and prudence. 

Every experienced moment has two components: pleasurable (hedonistic) and meaningful (purposeful). Strike a balance between enjoyment and meaning, or switch between the two.

26. The Circle of Dignity--Part I
But if not

A modern phrase would be "Over my dead body." The circle of dignity draws together your individual pledges and protects them from three forms of attack: better arguments, mortal danger, and deals with the Devil.

Things in the circle of dignity shouldn't be rationally justifiable. If they were, you'd never get any peace.

Be prepared to disappoint some people, hurt people, and be hurt in turn. 

27. The Circle of Dignity--Part II
If you break on the outside

If you don't make it clear on the outside what you believe deep down, you gradually turn into a puppet. Other people exploit you. If you break on the outside, at some point you'll break on the inside too.

We are assailed by attacks on our wills, our principles, our preferences. Advertisements, social pressure, fashion trends, media hype, and laws are all attacks on your circle of dignity. Society cares about cohesion, not the private interests of a single member. Individuals are dispensable.

The circle of dignity is not necessarily a matter of life and death but a battle to maintain the upper hand.

28. The Circle of Dignity--Part III
The Devil's bargain

To sell your soul--what does that mean? In financial transactions, certain things are considered taboo across all ages and cultures. No deals, no money changing hands. These things are sacred. For an economist, nothing is priceless. Sacred things are "massively overvalued". 

What are the things you hold so sacred you wouldn't sell them for any price? The lives of family, friends, health, etc.?

Don't let yourself be infected when the financial virus tries to penetrate your values' immune system.

29. The Book of Worries
How to switch off the loudspeaker in your head

The Stoic philosophers recommended determining what you can influence and what you can't.

Get a notebook and title it "My Big Book of Worries." Write down everything that's worrying you, no matter how justified, idiotic, or vague.

Take out insurance.

Find focused work to avoid brooding.

30. The Opinion Volcano
Why you're better off without opinions

In giving opinions, three mistakes are made: we comment on topics in which we have no interest, we comment on unanswerable questions, and we give over-hasty answers to complex questions.

With difficult questions, our brain tends to pick a side: I like, or I don't like. It's superficial and inadequate. We quickly try to find reasons and examples to back it up.

Throw in all the questions that don't interest you in a "too complicated" bucket.

When you do want to form an opinion, set aside some time to write about it in peace. Get external viewpoints, including opposing ones. Question your opinion. 

31. Your Mental Fortress
The Wheel of Fortune

Boethius, one of the last Stoics, was unjustly sent to jail. 

Accept the existence of fate. 

Everything you own, value, and love are ephemeral. 

If you complain, remember that the positive has outweighed the negative (or you wouldn't be complaining). Whining is misplaced.

Your "mental fortress" (your thoughts, mental tools, and how you interpret negative events such as bad luck) cannot be taken from you.

32. Envy
Mirror, Mirror on the Wall

Envy is the most pointless and toxic of all emotions. It's an animal instinct. Stop comparing yourself to other people (easier said than done).

Choose a place to live where you're the "local elite". 

Be aware of the focusing illusion (say if your neighbor has a better car). Objectively, a car contributes little to overall well-being.

If nothing works, deliberately identify the worst aspects of the person's life and imagine them struggling with those problems.

If you're going to be proud of anything, be proud of your modesty.

33. Prevention
Avoid problems before you have to solve them

Wisdom is not accumulation of knowledge. It is a practical ability. Virtually all difficulties are easier to avoid than to solve, so "Wisdom is prevention". 

A "lack of imagination" might cause trouble (the gambler who bet everything on a horse running alone, but which jumped over the fence and did not finish). 

Spend 15 minutes a week focusing intently on potential catastrophic risks in your life (a pre-mortem). Track back and analyze what led to this imagined catastrophe, right down to the underlying causes. Try to address these issues so that the worst never actually happens.

34. Mental Relief Work
Why you're not responsible for the state of the world

There's not much you can do personally about injustices of the world. Donate money. Drastically reduce your news consumption. Evil is all around us and cannot be stamped out. You're not responsible. Lead an upright, productive life.

35. The Focus Trap
How to manage your most important resource

Focus is the most important factor in Buffett's success. Blindly accepting Facebook updates, emails, subway screens, etc. should make you feel like a spoon-fed slave. Reading them is paying in focus, time, or even money. 

Don't confuse what's new with what's relevant. Avoid content or technology that's free. Give multimedia a wide berth. Information is best absorbed as books.

Focus cannot be divided. Act from a position of strength, not weakness.

Your happiness is determined by how you allocate your attention. 


36. Read Less, But Twice--On Principle
We're reading wrong

The effect of reading twice is much greater than double. 

37. The Dogma Trap
Why ideologues oversimplify things

Intervention into social structures results into many layers of effects. So we take shortcuts, like merely adopting the opinions of our peers. 

Ideologies are party lines raised to the power of ten, and come with a pre-packaged set of opinions. Avoid ideologies and dogmas at all cost. 

Ideologies explain everything, are irrefutable, and are obscure. For example, Marxism. Avoid slogans. Look for counterarguments, and think independently. What specific facts would you need in order to give up your worldview?

38. Mental Subtraction
How to realize that you're happy

Imagine you have lost an arm, or a loved one. Then think about how happy you are with life right now. 

The mind habituates quickly to new states, good or bad.  People who habitually make a "gratitude" checklist will find it weakens its well-being effect compared to those who do it less frequently. 

Instead of thinking about all the things you don't yet have, consider how much you'd miss the things you do have if you didn't have them any longer.

39. The Point of Maximum Deliberation
Thinking is to acting like a torch is to a floodlight

The best ideas come to you when you're writing, not while you're thinking. This applies to all spheres of human activity. We've got to act, not agonize. The moment where the amount of additional information that can be gleaned by pondering an issue drops to zero is the point of maximum deliberation. It is quickly reached.

Investment decisions should take 3 days, decisions about your private life, a week, and a career change, 5 days. 

While you're thinking, the risk of failure is nil. The introspection illusion is the mistaken notion that contemplation by itself can allow us to identify our true desires, our purpose in life.

40. Other People's Shoes
Role reversal

Example: in Opsware, Customer Support and Sales Engineering were bitterly accusing each other of not following each other's requests. The cofounder made each head of each department switch roles permanently.

Only by doing can you understand. Imagining yourself in that situation is not enough. 

Thinking and doing are separate spheres.

Stable organizations like the church recruit from within. Role reversal is by far the most efficient way of building mutual understanding. 

Reading a good novel sits somewhere between thinking and doing.

41. The Illusion of Changing the World--Part I
Don't fall for the "Great Men" Theory

The notion that an individual can change the world is one of the greatest ideologies of our century--and one of its grandest illusions. The first cognitive bias is the focusing illusion. We overestimate the significance of what we're doing. Secondly is the intentional stance. We assume an intention behind every change. Behind every global development we put a human being willing it into existence (India needed Gandhi to gain independence). "Better to assume too much than too little."

Do not idolize "great men", nor fall into the illusion that you can be one yourself.

42. The Illusion of Changing the World--Part II
Why you shouldn't put anyone on a pedestal--least of all yourself

"Great men" were products of their age. If Gutenberg didn't invent the printing press, someone else would have. 

In the great scheme of things, you're insignificant, unnecessary, and interchangeable. The only place where you can make a difference is in your own life. Don't believe too much in your self-importance.



43. The "Just World" Fallacy
Why our lives aren't like classic crime

Most people are convinced that the world is fundamentally just. It is not. Simply accept the unfairness of the world as fact. There's no plan for the world. It is fundamentally amoral. 

Candide says, "We must take care of our garden." 

44. Cargo Cults
Don't build planes out of straw

The islanders who saw the military airplanes dropping food thought that buildings runways and planes out of straw would bring them back. 

Do not mimic your idols (such as buying Moleskines to copy Hemingway, which he didn't use anyway) thinking you'll become like them. Such substanceless imitation is pointless.

45. If You Run Your Own Race, You Can't Lose
Why general knowledge is only useful as a hobby

Specialize in a specific topic. Globalization increased the "winner takes all" effect. Stop hoarding all the knowledge you possibly can.

46. The Arms Race
Why you should avoid the field of battle

People are forced to arm themselves because everyone else is doing so. If you want to be a professional musician, don't be a pianist or violinist.

47. Making Friends With Weirdos
Get to know outsiders but don't be one yourself

Outsiders enjoy a tactical advantage. They don't have to adhere to establishment protocols. 

No flattery. Don't stand on your dignity. Be tolerant. Reciprocity.

48. The Secretary Problem
Why our sample sizes are too small

Statistically, when interviewing 100 candidates, reject all of the first 37. Then hire the next one who is better than all of these first 37; the mathematical explanation is 100 / e (2.718).

Don't make decisions too soon. Keep sample sizes large; the world is large and diverse.


49. Managing Expectations
The less you expect, the happier you'll be

Distinguish between:
"I have to have it:" a necessity
"I want to have it:" a desire, preference, or goal
"I expect it:" an expectation

Seeing desires as musts will make you an unpleasant person to be around. While a life without goals is a wasted life, we mustn't be shackled to them.

Preferred indifferents are preferences that are ultimately insignificant to my happiness.

Don't fall for expectation engineering. expectations hold immense internal sway. Deduct two points from a rating between 0 and 10.

50. Sturgeon's Law
How to tune your bullshit detector

90% of everything is crap. But don't try to cleanse the world of nonsense. If you're not sure whether something is bullshit, it's bullshit.

51. In Praise of Modesty
The less self-important you are, the better your life will be

The type of person who possesses boundless self-esteem and vehemently defends his possessions is more likely to pass on his genes. The problem is that this kind of sensitivity messes things up for us. 

Don't be too full of yourself. Self-importance requires energy. You will suffer from self-serving bias (wanting to look good). You'll make enemies.

52. Inner Success
Why your input is more important than your output 
[this is the most confusing chapter]

Every country has a ranking of the richest people, highest-paid sports stars, etc. How successful are these success stories? Depends on how you define success. Society controls how individual people spend their time through how it measures success and bestows prestige.

Why is modern society trying to steer their sheep toward material success and not, say, to additional leisure time? Simply because economic growth keeps societies together. The prospect of improvements in living standards, however remote, limits pressure for wealth redistribution. So long as there is growth there is hope, and that makes large income differential tolerable. 

Definitions of success are products of their time. Don't just blindly follow the flags.

Material success is a 100 percent matter of chance. Stop idolizing rich people. 

True success is inner success--ataraxia--tranquility of the soul, not self-contemplation, yoga, or incense. Maintain your equanimity despite the slings and arrows of fate.

To be successful is to be imperturbable, regardless of whether you're flying high or crash landing.

How can we achieve inner success? By focusing exclusively on the things we can influence and resolutely blocking out everything else. Input, not output. We can't control output because chance keeps sticking its oar in. 

Money, power, and popularity are things over which we have only limited control. Losing them will send you in a tailspin if they're the focus of your attention. However, if you're trained to be serene, imperturbable and ataraxic, you'll mostly be happy, no matter what fate throws your way.

Success is peace of mind, which is a direct result of self-satisfaction in knowing you made the effort to do your best to become the best that you are capable of becoming.

Realistically, no one is going to strive 100 percent for inner success and pay no heed to the external kind. Through daily practice, we can edge closer to the ideal of ataraxia.

Ask yourself, when did you fail today? When did you let the day be poisoned by toxic emotions? What things beyond your control did you let upset you? Which mental tools are required for self-improvement? Don't be the richest person in the cemetery. Make each day your masterpiece.

Those seeking external success (wealth, a job as CEO, gold medals, honors) are actually striving for inner success too; they just don't realize it. A CEO might buy a Grande Complication watch because he likes the way it looks, or so that he'll be envied. Either way, it's because it makes him feel good. Otherwise, he wouldn't buy it.

The truth is that people desire external gain because it nets them internal gain. The question that suggests itself is obvious. Why take the long way round? Just take the direct route.

Afterword


The three main sources of thinking are modern psychology, Stoicism, and the philosophy of value investing.
