2. forget about the perfect set-up; self-correct whatever goes wrong
3. flexibility fatigues the mind, make pledges and stick to them
6. be consistently not stupid, instead of trying to be very intelligent
7. your success is based on genes and external factors you have no control over
8. introspection is unreliable and won't lead to the good life
8. don't trust your emotions
16. your focus should be on the work, not the result, the success
17. liberate yourself from what others think of you
19. goals work and are important, but leave them vague and achievable
21. make long-term plans but enjoy the present
26. commit to a limited amount of beliefs you will defend vigorously
29. deal only with things you can influence or affect
30. if a topic is too complex, it's better to not have an opinion on it
31. Fortuna is the personification of Fate who turns the wheel of fortune
31. choose how you react to the ups and downs of life
32. envy is an animal instinct, and the most toxic of all emotions
32. resist the urge to compare yourself to others. avoid school reunions
34. you are not responsible for the ills of the world
35. focus, time and money are our most important resources
35. focus cannot be divided
35. happiness is determined by how you allocate your attention
38. mental subtraction is imagining and feeling how life would be without good things you are accustomed to
39. act instead of just mulling things over
42. don't believe in your own self-importance
43. the world is fundamentally amoral
49. goals are desires, such as wanting children
49. we cannot expect others to conform to our expectations any more than the weather
49. separate necessities, desires and expectations
49. rate your expectations of dates, projects, parties, books, etc. from 1 to 10 and purposely lower it 2 points
50. if you're not sure whether something is bullshit, it's bullshit
51. self-importance requires energy; you have to keep track whether others like you or not
52. definitions of success are products of their time
52. inner success is achieved by focusing exclusively on things we have control over
52. be serene, imperturbable, tranquil
52. success is about attitude, not winning titles or earning material goods
