*** Preface

Spurious and dangerously misleading teachings in vogue today:

- Be in the moment (rebuttal: the present is the only place you CAN be. You need to take charge of your mind. The past and the future are simply a play of memory and imagination)

- Do only one thing at a time (rebuttal: harness and learn to ride the mind)

- Positive thinking (rebuttal: it is a quick-fix mantra, a way of sugarcoating your reality)

- Claim that Love is the core of the universe (rebuttal: Love is a human possibility. Your dog is full of love)

All of these puerile philosophies come from the assumption that existence is human-centric

Truth is timeless, but technology is contemporary

*** When I Lost my Sense

Who is God? Where is he? If the world is round, where is up?

Language is nothing but a conspiracy between humans. From the sounds from the mouth, the listener makes up the meanings

"I do not know" is the ONLY door to seeking and knowing

The way the body pulses, the way organs function, the fact that boundaries are limited to the external world

To really know spirituality, don't look FOR anything. Otherwise, the problem is that you have already defined what you are looking for. The important thing is the faculty of looking

Sadhguru only thought about HOW he wanted to live life, not WHAT or WHY

One day, he experienced the miraculous alchemy of digestion--the process by which an external substance becomes a part of him

The source of creation and life is an intelligence far greater than human logical intelligence

Life is the ultimate intelligence. Human intellect is mere smartness that ensures survival

Human nature is such that we always yearn to be something more than what we are right now (example: wanting a larger and larger cubicle)

Freedom is seen as the natural longing in every human being

*** The way out is in

Everything you have done in your life was because of Joy.

Life begins with survival

Well-being is a deep sense of pleasantness; we call this 'health'

If your body feels very pleasant, we call it 'pleasure'

If your mind becomes pleasant, we call it 'joy'

If your emotions become pleasant, we call it 'love'

Other words: compassion, bliss, ecstasy.

When your surroundings become pleasant, it is 'success'

Pleasantness is the only goal

What's happening in your head is YOUR dream.

Even if the world doesn't happen the way you want it, at least your thoughts and emotions should happen the way you want them to.

Our inner ecology is a mess. The life process of earning a living, reproducing, and raising a family is a struggle. Animals do so effortlessly

Unless we do the right things, the right things will not happen to us

You can bullshit yourself into all kinds of emotional states, but the problem is that it won't last.

The source of human experience comes from within: pain or pleasure, joy or misery, agony or ecstasy

The human folly is to try to extract joy from the outside.

You see the whole world within yourself.

There exists a bliss narcotic that is created and consumed by your own system.

Most people think peace and joy are the goals of spiritual life. In reality, they are not things you attain at the end of life. They are the basis of your life

Human life is longing for unlimited expansion

The spiritual quest is a natural longing. You must handle it consciously. Only when you are blissful will you be in the highest state of receptivity. If keeping yourself pleasant is a big challenge, you can't take on other challenges.

The reason simple things like being joyful and loving have become ultimate aspirations is that people are living without paying attention to the life process.

Most people refer to "life" as the accessories of life: work, family, relationships, homes, cars, clothes, or gods they pray to.

The foundations of peace and bliss are not about attending to external realities, but in accessing and organizing the inner nature of your being

When you realize that all you experience is within, this homecoming is enlightenment

The reason enlightenment is so far away is that we have categorized the world into good and bad, God and Devil, heaven and hell. Loving your enemy is hard when you have labeled them.

Adiyogi said that judgments like up and down, good and bad, are all assumed. Inward and outward is the one context we are sure of.

The only way out is in

*** Design your Destiny

When it is someone else's problem, it's destiny. But if my stomach is empty, I will have my own plan

Destiny has become a scapegoat, a way to deal with failure, a fatalistic ruse to reconcile ourselves to uncomfortable situations. It is a consoling word, but disempowering

To be human means you can mold situations you are living in the way you want them

What you know as "myself" is just an accumulation. It can be yours, but it can never be you.

Creating your own destiny does not mean you have to control every situation in the world. It is about steadily heading toward your well-being and ultimate nature, no matter what is around you. You RIDE the situations, not get crushed by them.

When you pursue your likes and dislikes, you feel alone. Once existence yields to you, it delivers you to a different place of grace.

Judgments about good and bad are essentially human and socially conditioned. But existence is not judgmental

*** No boundary, No burden

Story: A husband and wife who agreed that the first one to speak had to close the door. Neither side wanted to do it so they sat in silence. Meanwhile, thieves came in and even shaved the man's mustache.

There are situations in life that hinge on the question: who's responsible?

You have refined the old blame game into a fine art.

Responsibility is much misunderstood. It does not mean taking on the burdens of the world. It does not mean accepting blame for the things you have done or not. It is not about guilt.

Responsibility is simply about your Ability to respond. All it requires is for you to realize what exactly you are responsible for and what you are not. If you decide "I am responsible," you will have the ability to respond.

Only if you realize you are responsible do you have the freedom to create yourself the way you want to be, not as a reaction to the situations in which you exist.

Reactivity is enslavement. Responsibility is freedom.

When you are able to create yourself the way you want, you can create the life the way you want as well.

While your outer life is not 100% under your control, you can be 100% in control of your inner life.

Spur of the moment, reactive emotions like anger typically don't end well.

Humans are in a perennial state of complaint

The choice is to respond consciously to the present, or react compulsively to it.

in conscious response, every life situation can be seen as an opportunity for growth

If you habitually think "I am the way I am because of someone else," you are using life situations merely as opportunities for self-destruction or stagnation

Story: a girl who berated her brother for forgetting his shoes as they were taken to Nazi concentration camps never saw him again. She decided to never again speak to anyone in a way that she may later regret, because it could be the last time they see each other.

if you take no responsibilty for the way you are now, you have forsaken your future

Resentment, anger, jealousy, pain, are poisons you drink but expect someone else to die.

the more you are able to respond to everything around you, the freer you are.

responsibilty is not action. the ability to respond gives you the freedom to act. it also gives you the freedom not to act

Your ability to act is always limited, but there are no limitations on your ability to respond.

Responsibility is not about action: talking, thinking, or doing. it is about being.

You are restrained by mental resistance, crippled by its own limited logic

The stifling of life, the limiting your responsibilty, suffocating yourself physically, emotionally, and intellectually, is understood by people as safety, as security

If you are lonely, it is because you have chosen to become an island unto yourself. it doesn't have to be this way.

"I am not responsible" makes you unwilling to get along with anyone, even yourself. it comes to a point when you believe you are not even responsible for what is happening within yourself.

the ability to respond is the basis of life

responsibilty seems to lead us seamlessly to another much-abused word: love.

all over we are told that love is the ultimate, the supreme. but when we try to become loving, it is difficult and often ends up seeming pretentious.

to be loving is simply a willingness to respond freely and openly.

Love is not something you do, it is just the way you are.

Love has nothing to do with someone else. it is all about you, a way of being.

we build illusory walls and doors, then illusory keys through which we let other people in

for many people, love is initially a joy, then it becomes an anxiety.

Once your joy is on self-start rather than push-start, you have upgraded your technology.

Recognize consciously: "My ability to respond is limitless, but my ability to act is limited. I am one hundred percent responsible for everything I am and everything I am not, for my capacities and my incapacities, for my joys and my miseries. I am the one who determines the nature of my experience in this life and beyond. I am the maker of my life"

The word "God" signifies limitless responsibilty

boundaries are burdensome. lines drawing ideology, creed, race, and religion only breed fear, hatred, and anger.

SADHANA: be in active conscious response to the food you eat, the air you breathe, and the water you drink. this is what is nourishing you. the food are all a part of life themselves, but are willing to become you. how willing are you to surrender to anyone?

Take this simple idea throughout the whole day: "my responsibilty is limitless, if i am willing, i can respond to everything"

*** And now, yoga

no matter who you are or what you have achieved, you still want a little more than what you have right now. this is human desire. but the fundamental desire is for boundless expansion.

The science of yoga is the science of being in perfect alignment, in absolute harmony, in complete sync with existence.

Making your inner life blissful is something that everyone is capable of.

You need a certain mastery over the dimensions of body, mind, emotion, and energy

The religious nuts have exported love, bliss, and peace to divine love, bliss, and peace. These are human qualities.

To be joyful and peaceful every moment of your life are human possibilities, not superhuman qualities.

Yoga is not about being superhuman. It is about realizing that being human is super.

*** Body

There are two basic forces within you, that appear opposing but are not. One is your instinct of self-preservation, which compels you to build walls around you. The other is the constant desire to expand, to become boundless.

These two forces are related to two different aspects of your life. Self-preservation needs to be limited to the physical body.

The walls of self-preservation today are the walls of self-imprisonment tomorrow.

The very seat of your experience is within you, but your perception is entirely outward bound

SADHANA: Start by paying attention to everything you think of as yourself just before you fall asleep: thoughts, emotions, hair, skin, clothes. Know that none of this is you. There is no need to make any conclusion about what "you" are or what "truth" is

the physical body is only a part of you

SADHANA: A way of listening to life is by paying attention to it experientially. Choose your breath, heartbeat, or little finger. just pay attention to it for eleven minutes at a time. keep your attention on any sensation, but feel free to continue doing whatever you are doing. if you lose attention, simply refocus.

Relief from something that you cannot hold within you is always the greatest pleasure

SADHANA: it is best to reduce your meals to two per day

Look after raw foods and what your body feels most comfortable eating

Soak nuts in water for six to eight hours

*** Mind

A fundamental freedom you have is to THINK whatever you want

The problem is: the fact that your mind is not taking instructions from you

There is a distinction between you and your mind, between what you have gathered in terms of body and mind

There are only two forms of suffering in this world: physical and mental

The ultimate nature of existence is borderless unity. This experience is possible only if you maintain that space between you and your body-mind

don't try to forcibly stop mental activity. with your mind, all three pedals are throttles. there are no brakes and no clutch. the mind only accelerates no matter which pedal you hit. If you pay no attention to it, thoughts will slowly subside, leaving you in a rich and vibrant silence

SADHANA: Remind yourself at least once an hour that everything you're carrying--your handbag, money, relationships, heaviness in your heart and body--are things you've accumulated over a period of time. if you become more and more conscious of this fundamental fact, even as a process of disidentification grows within you--balanced by a deep sense of involvement in everything around you--you will move from misery and madness of the human mind toward meditativeness

instead of "I think, therefore I am," consider "You are, therefore you MAY think"

SADHANA: set your tap to drip five to ten drops per minute. observe how each drop forms, how it falls. it is an exercise in attention.

Once your intellect gets identified with something, you function within the realm of this identity. All your thoughts and emotions flow from that identification. they are a certain level of prejudice. the mind functions from limited data and is fronted by an essentially discriminatory intellect.

SADHANA: just sit alone for an hour. no reading, television, phone, communication, nothing. see what thoughts dominate your mind--food, sex, car, anything else. if you think about people or things, your identification is essentially with your body. if your thoughts are about what you would like to do in the world, your identification is with your mind. everything else is just an offshoot of these two aspects. this is not a value judgment.

awareness is beyond intellect and memory. it is about discerning the real from the illusory, what is existentially true from what is psychologically true.

awareness is not something that you do. it is what you are. it is aliveness.

SADHANA: Awareness at the transition from wakefulness to sleep (it is a lot of work)

The moment you get identified with your limited ideas of morality you become completely twisted. Trying to avoid something considered "wrong" or "sinful" usually means that they are constantly thinking about it. Avoiding something is not freedom from it. Spirituality, on the other hand, is born of inclusion

*** Energy

Due to the nature of our outward-bound senses, we are deceived into believing that outward expression will somehow bring fulfillment.

yoga means to experience the mental and physical process distinctly, not as the basis of yourself, but as that which is caused by you

it is possible to create some distance between you and what you have gathered (your body and mind)

life can be tasted  and transcended only when there is a distinction between the psychological and the existential.

Suffering is entirely self-created. Every human being has the choice: to suffer or not to suffer.

The quality of your life is always decided by how you experience life, not by what life offers you

denying, suppressing, or avoiding life brings more bondage than freedom. The desire "I don't want karma", is itself a big karma

SADHANA: When you realize that all your material achievements are of value only in comparison with those who don't have them, this is joy that springs from another's deprivation. Can you really call this joy?

SADHANA (continued) If you were alone on this planet, what would you want for yourself? Sit for five minutes and see what your life would be like if you were absolutely alone in this world. What would you truly long for? What would really matter to you if there were no external appreciation or critique? If you do this every day, you will become aligned with the longings of the life that you are, rather than the accumulated karmic mess you believe you are.

what is often referred to as occult is also known as tantra. in the classical sense, it means technology. it has nothing to do with unbridled sexuality

*** Joy

Joy is a rare visitor in most people's lives. The intention of this book has been to make it your lifelong companion.

joy is not some elusive spiritual goal. it is simply the background milieu that is needed for any aspect of your life to unfold magically and wonderfully.

we have so much comfort and conveniences yet cannot claim to be the most joyful or loving generation in history. some are suffering their failure, but ironically, many are suffering the consequences of their success.

what is missing is human consciousness. the human being is not in place.
