p. 313-320

The Lateral Thinking Techniques

SIX THINKING HATS

Each of the six fundamental modes of thinking behavior is given a hat of a different color. In this way thinking can be switched at will from one mode to another. A particular type of thinking can be requested at any moment. Critical thinking can be made more productive by restricting its use to the right moment. The six thinking hats provide a concrete framework for moving away from traditional argument and adversarial thinking to the cooperative exploration of a subject.

White hat: information thinking
Red hat: intuition and feeling
Black hat: caution and the logical negative
Yellow hat: the logical positive
Green hat: creative effort and creative thinking
Blue hat: control of the thinking process itself

THE CREATIVE PAUSE

This is a very brief pause, within the mind of the thinker, to consider whether there might be an alternative or another way of doing things. There is the willingness to give creative attention to any point. In the smooth flow of thinking or discussion many things are taken for granted. The creative pause allows the thinker to pause a little bit longer to look at something.

SIMPLE FOCUS

We normally think only about problems and difficulties that force our attention. Yet powerful creative results can be obtained by focusing on matters that everyone else has ignored. The simple focus is not an attempt to generate new ideas but a willingness to note a point as a potential focus for creative effort: "That would be a good creative focus." Noting down these focuses without any attempt to generate ideas is enough.

CHALLENGE

The creative challenge is one of the most fundamental processes
of lateral thinking. The creative challenge is not an attack,
a criticism, or an attempt to show why something is inadequate.
It is a challenge to uniqueness: "Is this the only
possible way?" The creative challenge assumes that something
is done in a certain way for reasons that existed before and may
or may not still exist. In all cases, there may be a better way
of doing things.

The creative challenge can be directed at the matter itself but
can also be directed at traditional thinking about the matter. The
challenge can also be directed at the thinking that is taking place
at any moment: "Why do we have to look at it this way?" The
challenge can be directed at the factors that shape our thinking:
dominating concepts, assumptions, boundaries, essential factors,
avoidance factors, and either/or polarizations. With the challenge
we take a direct look at these factors to see if they are really
necessary.

The creative challenge also challenges "continuity" where
something is done in a certain way because it was done that
way yesterday. This process of "continuity analysis" looks at the
following types of continuity:

The continuity of neglect: no one has bothered to think about it

The continuity of lock-in: having to fit in with other matters

The continuity of complacency: repeated success protects from rethinking

The continuity of time-sequence: trapped by the sequence of our experiences

ALTERNATIVES

This is another of the fundamental processes of lateral thinking.
The very essence of creativity is the search for alternatives.

It involves the willingness to stop to look for alternatives when
there is no apparent need to do so, to stop to look for alternatives
even when the next step is logical and available, the willingness
to make an effort to find further alternatives instead of being
satisfied with those that have been found (in practical matters
there is a need for a cut-off point in this search), the willingness to
"design" new alternatives through changing the situation instead
of just being content to "analyze" the given situation, and the
importance of defining the "fixed point" to which the alternatives
will refer: "Alternatives with respect to what fixed point?" The
fixed point may be purpose, group, resemblance, or concept. It
is usually possible to define several fixed points in a situation
and then to seek alternatives for each of these.

THE CONCEPT FAN

This is particularly useful for "achievement" thinking: "How do
we get there?" Achievement thinking includes problem solving and
task completion. The concept fan is an elaborated way of seeking
alternatives by using concepts to "cascade" further alternatives.

We work backwards from the purpose of the thinking to the
broad concepts or "directions" that we would have to take to get
there.

Then we work backwards from the directions to the "concepts"
which are the ways of moving in that direction. There
may be several layers of concepts ranging from the broader to
the more specific.

Then we work backwards from the concepts to the "ideas",
which are practical and specific ways of putting the concepts into
action.

When setting up a concept fan it is possible to start at any
point and then move forwards to the purpose of the thinking
or backwards to the specific ideas.

CONCEPTS

It is important to be able to work with concepts and at the
concept level. Concepts are general methods or general ways of
doing things. Concepts are expressed in broad, blurry, nonspecific
ways. Every concept has to be put into action through a
specific "idea". The purpose of working at concept level is to be
able to "breed" further ideas.

Sometimes concepts are created directly. At other times it is
useful to "pull back" from any idea to discover the concept behind
the idea. Whenever anything is being done we should make
an effort to extract the concept or concepts involved. (whether
they were designed or not). Once we can extract the concept,
we can then strengthen the concept, change the concept, or find
better ideas with which to put the concept into action.

There are "purpose" concepts, which relate to what we are
trying to do. There are mechanism concepts, which describe
how the effect is going to be produced.

There are value concepts, which indicate how something is
going to provide value.

PROVOCATION AND MOVEMENT

There is an absolute need for provocation in any self-organizing
information system (such as perception). Provocation and movement
are needed in order to cut across patterns. Cutting across
patterns is made necessary by the asymmetric nature of patterns:
something that is obvious in hindsight may be invisible to foresight.

The new word "po" stands for Provocative Operation and
signals that something is intended directly as a provocation.

With any provocation we need to use the active mental operation
of "movement" in order to move forward to a new idea.
Movement is an active operation and is not just a suspension of
judgment.

ARISING PROVOCATIONS

A creative thinker may choose to treat as a provocation any
statement, remark, or event that the thinker experiences. It does
not matter whether or not this was intended as a provocation.
The choice is entirely up to the thinker. An idea which is judged
as being unsound or even ridiculous can nevertheless be used as
a provocation to move forward to ideas that are useful. In this way
provocations can be said to "arise" without being deliberately
set up.

ESCAPE PROVOCATIONS

These are provocations that are deliberately set up by the creative
thinker. The thinker takes any point that is "taken for granted"
or normal in the situation and then proceeds to "escape" from
this. The escape is carried out by negating the point, canceling
the point, dropping the point, or simply doing without it.

The "taken-for-granted" point must never be a problem, complaint,
or difficulty.

STEPPING-STONE PROVOCATIONS

These are also deliberate ways of setting up provocations. It is
important that the provocations be set up boldly and without any
thought whatsoever as to how the provocations might be
used. There is no point in massaging an existing idea to form
a provocation. The provocations should be set up mechanically.
There are four methods for getting a stepping-stone provocation.

Reversal:

The normal "direction" of action is taken and then "reversed"
to form the provocation. There must be action in the opposite direction.

Exaggeration:

The normal measurements or dimensions (number, size, weight)
are exaggerated beyond normal either upwards or downwards.
A downward exaggeration should never reach zero.

Distortion:

The normal relationship between involved parties or the normal
sequence of events is altered in an arbitrary fashion to create
a "distortion" of the situation. This forms the provocation.

Wishful Thinking:

Here a fantasy wish is put forward: "Wouldn't it be nice if ..."
This must be a fantasy not just a desire or an objective. A fantasy
is something that you do not realistically expect to happen.

THE RANDOM INPUT

The background principle is that if you start from a different
point, then you increase the likelihood of opening up patterns
different from those you would have used when starting from the "center"

The most convenient form of the random input is the random
word, which can be obtained in a number of ways (including
using the second reading of a watch to select a word from a list
of 60 words). This random word is then used to open up new
ideas around the chosen focus.

The random input process can also work with objects, pictures,
reading, exhibition, and so on. The important point is that
the input is random and is not chosen.

MOVEMENT

Movement is an active mental operation and is not just an absence
of judgment. Movement can operate at the level of a general
willingness to move forward from an idea to a new idea, but
there are also systematic and formal ways of getting movement
that can be used

Extract a principle:

We extract a principle, concept, feature, or aspect from the
provocation and ignore the rest. We seek to work with that
principle to build a new idea around it.

Focus on the Difference:

In what way is the provocation different from the usual way of
doing things? Can we move forward from that difference to a
useful new idea? Even if the difference is tiny, we still focus on
that difference to seek a new idea. This method is also the best
defense against the idea-killing phrase, "the same as..."

Moment to Moment:

We visualize the provocation being put into action--even if this
is impossible in reality. We then watch to see what would happen
"moment to moment". We try to pull out a useful new idea from
this observation.

Positive Aspects:

Here we focus on those aspects that are directly positive in the
provocation. We ignore the rest and seek to build an idea from
these positive aspects.

Under What Circumstances:

We look around for special circumstances under which the provocation
would offer, as it is, some direct value. We then seek to move
forward to a useful idea, either for those circumstances, or,
more usefully, for other circumstances as well.

THE STRATAL

This is a "sensitizing" technique. We put together five unconnected
statements about the situation and then see what new idea
emerges. There should be no attempt to be descriptive or
comprehensive with the statements, and no attempt should be made
to cover all aspects. To make the stratal more random it can be
useful to write statements on slips of paper, which are put into
a bag from which five slips are drawn. The number five is for
perceptual convenience.

THE FILAMENT TECHNIQUE

The basic requirements in any thinking situation are listed one
under the other. Each of the requirements is then considered
in a "filament" extending from this requirement. This
consideration puts down ways in which that requirement is usually
met. The actual context of the problem or creative focus is totally
ignored.

In the passive way of using the filament technique, the filaments
are then considered until an idea "emerges" from this sensitizing
process.

In the active or "forced" way of using the filament technique,
items are picked out in each filament and then a determined
effort is made to force these items together to give a new idea.
